so it looks like we're ready to roll so
yeah okay right amazing okay so this is
our second lecture in David gra
Institute thank you dear rway my new
home for hosting us uh so this one is u
a strange lecture I'm a strange
person yeah so this is our dear friend
and a friend of David Graber and friend
of David Graber Institute Professor
Steve keing
um and this is Rock Stanford who's the
founder uh of David graer Institute one
of the founders who is going to introdu
to okay well thank you Nia and thank you
Steve for coming MH and so my
understanding is that you're a kind of
thorn in the S side of neoclassical
economics oh I have to be more than a
thorn but I'm starting there I'm aiming
on doing the shark and the side of the
but the thorn we'll do as a stup okay
well well well put and I mean I think a
thorn is good enough because the analogy
with a
balloon is relevant to neoc classical
economics all it takes is a thorn
doesn't even need a shark and so you're
an economist and you
bring um a sort of rational scientific
and empirical approach to the
rationalist scientist NE classical
economic approach y I would say yeah
they they Define rational of having
capacity to the future
accurately I Define that as totally
irrational and there are a waste of
space and we should get rid of them but
that's rather more difficult easier to
say than it is to do
unfortunately so do I take over here and
wait I just before you start I just want
to say that what we attempting to do we
attempting here to bring people who is
uh highly
professional
uh
and in the same time will'll be able to
talk to the people like us who's living
here in rway and uh have precious
problems uh for example one of them is
the common collabs that we're going to
talk today about um so this is a second
lecture the first one was about Frei
printing by Adrian Bower who is uh one
of the fathers of freeden prin this is
we're really honored to have you uh
and yeah we we hope to to find out what
is what is awaiting us and discuss it
with you well I just a quick question if
I can just get a an idea of how many
people are online
roughly four five
six 11 there's one screen so okay that's
a you people about 50% of the audience
so of course I can't I can't voxox the
people on screen there but I'll try to
voxox you so what'll be talking about is
how unprepared we are for climate change
and you'll notice that I'm wearing a
rather weird device around my neck and
I'm pointing a strange looking tube at
my nostrils this is because this is a
99.9% effective Hep filter against Co
and I don't know what you think about
the overall you know whether your
whether your Co Skeptics as well but I
think there's no doubt that the policy
of managing Co was a complete to use a
technical term up okay you went for
extremes of Boris Johnson saying let the
bodies pile high on the streets across
to just C A Hearn making sure that
nobody who got into New Zealand had Co
and you complete lockdown and you got
incredible range of discussion about
which was the right policy to take can
you get her immunity which technically
speaking you cannot U for the for a
virus that mutates as fast as Co through
to it just a cold I mean the range of
human reactions to that threat was Spann
a broad a broader spectum then you'd
actually want to exist showing just how
uncoordinated and disparate our
reactions are to an unknown threat we'
never we'd experienced it before the
last time we experienced a pandemic was
the so-called Spanish Flu in the
aftermath of the second world war that
is known to have killed more people than
sorry the first world war that's not
killed more people than died in the
first world war but it disappeared and
we're thinking the same that happened
with
Co climate change is a far more complex
issue than a single disease spreading
through a population and what I want to
get now just quick quick idea how many
of you think climate change is a beat up
doesn't actually exist be honest I don't
care I'll be happily if you think it's
nonsense uh and it's all been made by
academics trying to get more grants uh
do anybody believe that here in the
audience I I'm not sure about it I I
have an open mind about it okay okay
well that's good to hear so but the rest
of you convince it's happening okay well
I think if I had like a broad audience
if I did a sample of London I'd probably
get about it's 20 or 30% I'm only
guessing I don't know but 20 or 30%
would say it's a beat up and then
substantial fraction being in your
position of saying I don't know I'm open
to be convinced and then probably I
guess about 60 to something over 60 to
70% would yeah yes it's happening and
what does it
mean then if I if I did the same sample
of people who are actually professional
climate
scientists obviously they're going to
say it's happening probably half of them
are scared
shitless now that's the weird thing the
the people that I know who know most
about this topic are the ones who are
most terrified by what it
means uh whereas the majority of people
who don't know much about it are either
either thinking it's a con job and I
deal with people like that on a minute
by minute basis on internet let alone
daily uh to the lot of don't know what
the hell it means and where to be go so
what I'll try to do is to talk about the
way that I got into it uh to give you an
idea of why I'm citing with the climate
scientist who are scared shitless okay
and that is because I'm a Critic of
mainstream economics I have been a
Critic of the mainstream for 50 years I
actually l a student Revolt at in Sydney
University in 1973 so literally 50 years
ago against the teaching of mainstream
economics and at that stage I thought I
was taking on just economics alone but
what you
realize as you get more involved in
policy is that economics dominates
everything okay so I worked in the
department of trade in a unit unit of
the Australian government that was
supposed to enable management and unions
to cooperate to solve problems together
rather than being conflictual and that
was undermined by the economists and the
department of trade and particularly the
Departments economists and
treasury so an economic mindset
dominated that issue it also dominates
Healthcare it dominates govern policy
they're talking about austerity and so
on so ultimately it all comes back to
what economists believe and I realize
when I uh started to work on the role of
energy uh which is it's a strange one to
to talk about because if we turned off
the energy here in this room what would
happen dark well there be no total dark
we wouldn't be seeing each other okay um
I wouldn't have my co filter anymore our
audience would be gone
uh and we' slow to start to freeze
inside without
heating so energy is ubiquitous and
energy is vital and yet in economic
theory energy plays no role
whatsoever so the conventional theory of
Economics says you take labor and you
take capital and you combine them
together and you get output and there's
no role for energy in that at all so I
was one of the final research projects I
was doing as an academic is saying
that's simply not possible because we
know that nothing happens without energy
and we just I can make that case now and
you all agree with me okay nothing
happens without energy but economic
theory has a model of how production
occurs which emits energy completely and
then when they try to include it what
they do is they attack it on is what
they call a factor of production so they
have Labor is a factor of production and
Machinery is a factory of production
they call it capital but they mean
machinery and energy is a factor of
production so we combine the three
together in a
factory and that to me made no sense
either because if you put people in a
factory and machines in a factory and
then hit it with a lightning
bolt good St come out the other and do
they dead people do and destroyed
Machinery so that doesn't make sense but
that's what economists do so they say
well we've uh we we argue that there's
machines multiplied by uh lab multiplied
by energy gives you output and they
modify what they multiply by by having
an
exponent they like X2 if you talk about
y = x^2 as a function which is a
parabola then the exponent is two okay
so they have they use exponents as well
for labor and capital and energy and
they make sure they're sum to one
because the sensible argument then if we
double inputs you double output and that
makes sense you're working at a a set
scale of operation you double the labor
double the machines double the energy
you'll get twice as much output okay now
the question then is what do they powers
do they put there for each of Labor and
capital and energy and what they do
using their and I've notic I'm saying
they quite naturally I don't regard
myself as an
economist in the sense that what people
think is an economist is somebody that I
regard as a
lunatic so I I say they rather than us
okay um so I'm trying to BU an
alternative approach to economics that
does does it differently what they do is
they say well the exponent is based on
the share of GDP that goes to that
factor of production so labor gets about
70% of income capitalists get about 30%
so the exponents they use are 7 and3
rather than like yal X squ where the
expanded as two so when they bring in
energy as well they say well let's leave
labor at 70% and we're taking part of
the uh the capital capitalist class so
the we've got now how much does
capitalists that are producers of energy
get of total GDP and they get about 3 or
4% let's say point so sorry3 or 04 3 or
4% let's say it's 5% okay so they say
well then we have Labor times 7 to the
power of 7
most other Capital to the power .25 and
energy 05 and that's still sums to one
and I'm now I can give you papers and I
can give you academics who've done that
yeah what do they like I'm my background
is science oh good okay how do they oh
you're going to be you're going to be
your J will be on the floor by the time
I'm finished well I'm like how do they
decide these it's like wiggle Factor
like oh yeah little energy some labor
it's like based on what this I think I
enjoy having a dialogue with you over
this so let's keep this one rolling what
they did was the there's the what's
called what I what we call economics
originated in the 1870s and it
originated in the 1870s reaction to KL
Marx okay because Marx had taken the
previous uh what's called classical
school of economics and the classical
school argued that all product all uh
what they call Surplus and that's a word
we can happily discuss as well also this
comes from labor they said so um and L
marks argue that workers get paid uh the
means of subsistence so let's say it
take six hours to produce the means of
assistance for one worker in a factory
on average but the factory requires the
worker to work for 12 hours okay so the
gap of 6 hours is what marks called
Surplus value and that's was the source
of profit now what marks just did and
people who were parallel to Mark said
well the work is putting all the work in
why shouldn't they get all the output so
the reaction of the neoc classical and
that's the dominant School said no no no
it's not the worker doesn't produce all
the output it's the the worker adds
their their productivity the machine
adds its productivity and it's the
marginal productivity the change in
output from each factor that determines
their wage so they've got What's called
the marginal productivity theory of
income distribution and that then says
that workers receive what they call
their marginal product
and capitalists receed their marginal
product and everything's fair and
equable because you're receiving as your
income the return that you the
contribution you make to production in
the first place so it's seen as
meritocratic that's the idea that took
over so on that basis conventional
economists I I'll call them neoclassical
that's what they are neoclassical
economists thought that the uh workers
the wage workers wage was the marginal
product of labor and the work the
capitalists profit was the marginal
product of capital and they were both
equal to the income shares so they
automatically expected that workers
would get uh in the aggregate when you
add all workers now and say what are the
total Workforce contributing to
production that'd
get7 of output and capitals will
get3 okay so that was their expectation
then a pair of a mathematician and an
economist called cob and Douglas
respectively in L light
1920s when we didn't have anything like
quality of Statistics we have today for
the economy they put together three
index numbers one for output one for
labor and one for Capital so with index
numbers you all start at 100 in the same
year they had a set of 23 numbers from
1899 to
1922 okay starting at 100 and going
forward the Capital it went from 100 I
think 421 by 1922 labor from 100 to
about 220 output from about 100 to about
250 something of that nature and what
they did was then a regression on the
rising numbers okay and they got a
correlation coefficient for those who
did the mathematics of
97 between their formula and the
data and they then said we've got pretty
much the same
.94 the highest correlation coefficient
you get is one okay correlation
coefficients range fromus saying there's
an exactly negative relationship between
these two things to plus one saying
exactly positive and zero saying no
particular relationship at all so to get
a97 for the rising numbers and a 0.94
for the what they call the
um numbers with the trend removed looked
extremely high and the the values they
got were 75 and
.25 which were exactly the share of
workers and capitalists in production in
in JD that said fabulous we've confirmed
our Theory wonderful I have a question
uh that's amazing explanation so can can
I repeat to be sure yeah so before Marx
classical economics was saying that all
the wealth come from labor yep Marx said
no not Marx but the the anti-marxist
neoclassical Economist yeah they were
saying that well sorry you keep going I
interrupted you you keep going so you
correct me if I yeah so Mark said uh the
wealth come from uh labor but Capital
capitalizing on labor exploiting labor
yeah yeah that's right yeah and so then
uh neoclassical economics kind of return
to the original idea yeah saying no no
no that's okay you know so labor and
capital sharing equally yeah basically
being a very conservative political
project first of all that you're
fighting and in this case I want to ask
about our friend David gra so it looks
like he was saying that the whole idea
of production and productivity is wrong
because uh we don't need even to to make
all our uh civilization on trying to
produce as much as possible we need to
try to uh concentrate on reproduction of
life and that mean we should concentrate
on the labor that is more maintenance
than the labor of production you jumped
about five PES ahead of me okay sorry
I'm just trying to keep if I understand
because it's very difficult for me to
follow all this like
0.27% and I was like oh I'm still there
getting getting the point first of all
the conventional Theory NE classical
Theory says income distribution is a
meritocracy workers get what they
deserve and so the capitalists okay and
then workers get 75% and capitalists get
25% at this time so it's meritocratic
nobody should complain you know you're
getting what you're worth uh and we hey
we do this stuff St and we find out the
data supports us now from that point on
they simply assumed that those were the
correct coefficients they didn't check
them again they in fact made a change to
the way they analyzed better data coming
out later where they said well there's
technological change and labor and
capital when they worked out the the
contribution um they found most of it
most of the contribution to Growing
output came from improving technology
but the point comes back to that point 7
and three relationship when you do the
math that says that the change in output
is 7 times the labor okay plus. 25 * the
capital plus 05 time the
energy in other words energy plays very
little role in changing level of output
and this is a recent Pap open 1921 not
sorry 2021 pardon me 9 2121 2021 saying
that in production is quite ins
sensitive to
energy now that is simply an assertion
when you check the
data it's virtually one for one GDP to
out to
energy the the correlate and this is
doing proper statistics now when you
look back at what carbon Douglas did I
found that what they use they got they
got that very high correlation and the
numbers were correct for the rising data
but what you've got there is things are
going up so you correlate them yeah
they're both increasing you're going to
get a positive number virtually no
matter what it's the change that matters
and what they did was technically the
wrong thing when you do the change you
get the the figure they get for labor is
supposed to be 7 okay it actually came
out when you do the correlations
correctly is minus
one-15 so they were completely wrong
they didn't get the strength of data
they wanted and if that had been the
result they gave to Economist this
production function they call it would
never have come
about so so but when they still believe
it's true is they feed energy in there
and they say energy has got a Corr a
coefficient of
05 therefore if there's a change in
energy that will be 5% of the cause of
the change in GDP so they then said in
the case of the German economy that if
there's a 10% fall in energy coming from
Russia the GDP Willa Fall by 1 half of
1% you won't even notice okay you look
at empirical data If energy fell by 10%
production would fall by 10% it's one
for one so what they' left out is the
little insight that made me enabled me
to bring this in properly and it's
ridiculously simple and I'm embarrassed
to say it to a scientist but it's
realizing energy is an input to labor
and capital it's not a third factor of
production it's an input and the way
that I realized that was walking through
a friend's house full of statues and out
out of the back of my mind labor with
that energy is a corpse Capital without
energy is a sculpture so it's not a
third factor it's an input to each of
the other two and that completely
transforms the mathematics so at that
point I then thought okay now that I've
made a positive contribution to this
literature I can now go and see what the
neoclassical economists have done and I
expected to see
and I was
disappointed I saw on the scale of
a tyranosaurus Rex it was is far far
worse than I thought it would be because
it turns out economists and climate
change
Skeptics so they actually believe that
climate change can't be a serious
problem now to prove that it isn't a
serious problem they made up their own
numbers that's why I use the example of
cob and Douglas they their are numbers
together they did a legitimate attempt
but they they didn't do the change in
data properly they used a threeyear
moving average rather than annual change
and that that's where they got their
results from again it was still Bas by
the fact they were moving in much the
same direction so what the economists
did was they see well and this is the
very first paper that contributed to the
literature has anybody here heard of the
name William
nordhouse okay Nobel Prize winner okay
okay his first contribution to working
out the numbers was in 1991 so over 30
years ago and he said that uh there are
parts parts of the economy such as
Agriculture and forestry which are
strongly exposed to the climate and
therefore be affected by climate change
he said equally there are activities
this is virtually a quote uh like uh
fabrication of computer chips or
cardiovascular surgery which occurs in
carefully controlled environments that
is a quote which will be negligibly
affected by climate
change okay all right he then said our
estimate is that
87% of American GDP is produced in
carefully controlled environments that
been been neg negligibly affected by
climate change
87% of the economy now he's listed and
you're not going to believe this I come
to cre a straight face as I said all of
manufacturing all of
mining all of retail and hotel
Services all of the finance sector all
of government
he even included the rest of the world
which is 2.1% of his data set Imports
and imports to America negligibly
affected by climate
change now this was published in The
Economic Journal which is published by
Oxford University and it's ranked in the
number of top five journals in the world
the
economics the editors let him say that
mining would be unaffected by climate
change now even if you believe that
being under the only thing that
manufacturing holil and Retail Services
the go government the finance sector
except the rest of the world of course
okay have in common that under under a
roof so what he was assuming is the roof
will protect you from climate
change okay I know I want you guys were
you an academic or you a while ago oh
okay I would be hoping to get scientists
getting up pitchforks to go on Kick
economists out of the university for
totally unscientific Behavior that's
what he did okay now at a later stage
somebody pointed out while underground
mining there there open cut William so
he his next paper he said underground
mining so so so so he therefore thought
literally being undercover will protect
you from climate
change okay now that shows how much
economists innately know about climate
because there's no physical training
about that side of the human existence
to economists they don't learn anything
about minerals they don't learn about
the periodic table they don't learn uh
energy they don't learn the laws of
thermodynamics okay so they're ignorant
of all this stuff but they're confident
capitalism can cope with
anything and that's the problem the the
nature of the the discipline is that
they have a model of the economy which
tells them that it can instantly adjust
to any shock that it might Ser from the
outside world so there's one group of
economists who call themselves new
classicals and they presume that the
even the Depression was an equilibrium
experience for the economy okay they
believe that workers have wage demands
based on level of employment they will
rapidly respond to what the unemployment
rate is and if therefore there's an
increasing in the unemployment rate or
actually what we're actually measuring
is workers deciding oh the wage isn't
good enough for me I'd rather enjoy some
leisure so they see the great not not in
the Great Depression is a period where
workers decided to enjoy more Leisure so
they reduce their working hours by
25% may I ask you a question yeah
please is it your premise that there are
no economists who actually believe in
clate who believe in CL no there's not
no economists there's a minority who do
but most of them are people like me who
belong to a different school of thought
kth yeah s sorry korth I guess yeah so
there's the dominant school of thought
is called neoclassical economics and
roughly speaking that's about probably
85% to 90% of academic economists then
10 to 15% belong to different schools of
thought and they are disparaged and
criticized by the mainstream and driven
to low ranking universities like I was
head of school at Kingston University
for a while which is is a third rate
University I I never get into Oxford or
Cambridge okay um I teach I talk there
but they they would never get a job
there may I ask you what's your view of
Nicholas stern of who Nicholas Stern
he's a nice man who doesn't know what
he's talking about on
planet um Nicholas huh what Nicholas is
Nicholas is starting to realize that he
and Joe Nicholas are doing some very
good work criticizing what economist on
on climate change are becoming quite
outraged and scared so he's waking up
but when he wrote the stern
report uh I've forgotten which page it
is on the report I think it's page
261 but he used a model called the page
model which is designed by a guy called
Chris Christopher hope who's a
statistician and the page model is what
one of what's called an integrated
assessment models and all the economists
have made their own what they call I
and in the IM they have a minor they
have their own little climate model they
don't use the climate models used by
climate scientists made have their own
climate model only using temperature
they don't have rainfall inside their
models or anything else just
temperature and using that uh Stern used
that as part of his
predictions and Christopher was saying
the page model said that a a 8.4 de
increase in temperature would cause a
7.8% fall in
GDP 7 Dee increase sorry 7
increase 8.4 degree increase in
temperature would cause a 7.8% fall in G
that's a vast increase off the SC so I'm
we'd be dead there'd be nothing left
there be be it be reptiles to take over
the planet Steve okay yeah um let's talk
a little bit about what your view of the
reality is rather than
criticizing the disastrous well I mean
I'm scientist and two degrees is
potentially catastrophic audience to let
Steve talk and then we'll ask questions
at the end possibly that's
okay right yeah so you want to mind my
view well your views yeah what you think
is happening what do you think of the pl
I'm reading the scientists and like I I
can tell a scientist from a from a
ideologue and the economists are
basically ideolog who think they're
scientists and the scientists are simply
scientists and they can't work out why
on Earth they're being
ignored but uh the climate scientists I
speak to most of them would say that if
you had four degrees of warming maybe 1
billion humans would survive maybe 500
million civilization would fall apart uh
you couldn't do sedentary agriculture
anymore you couldn't have cities in the
sense that you'd be you have to become
nomadic once more and maybe 500 million
if we're lucky would survive maybe far
less than on
that that's what the scientists are
saying and the economists are telling
policy makers that 4 degrees uh which
they they actually serious think they
can predict what's going to happen at 4
degrees of warming is likely to ca about
a 5% fall in future GDP and what they
mean by 5% fall they mean that when we
hit 4 the GDP there will be 5% smaller
than it would have been if we didn't
have global warming at all which means
that they think the annual rate of
economic growth
is going to fall by something of the
order of
0.02% perom now when we measure GDP the
data we currently use measures it to a
supposed accuracy of 1/1 of 1% so what
this what economists are telling
politicians is that the rate of economic
growth will decline because of climate
change by less than the amount you can
measure on an annual
basis everything's going to go on fine
no this is what you L longor say as well
he's quoting The Economist when he makes
those numbers up he publishes on Twitter
so the economists have told the policy
makers that climate change will reduce
the level of economic growth by a factor
that is too small to measure on an
annual basis so they instead talk about
a future
G uh can I ask a question maybe we
should all raise hands and
then will be online so my question is uh
my friends uh climate scientists also
making predictions like scary
predictions with the big wise of
temperatures and in this case my
question is would be in this case such a
think as an economy at all oh there
wouldn't be an economy there nothing
left like I I'm now I'm now because I'm
working with a number of climate
scientists now and they're realizing
this is coming from the economists more
and more of them starting to realize
this they're themselves getting more
outrageous when they make speeches
because often you're you're afraid about
scaring the audience now Tim Lenton is
one of the people I work with so Tim is
Professor of I forgot he's actually is
atmospheric he's climate science
definitely but not sort the actual
particular subdiscipline he'd take
inside there but he's professor at exity
University and probably the world's
leading expert on tipping points I saw
Tim being interviewed like a video of
him being interviewed I diing a talk
somewhere and he he's asked about what's
the chance of us having a human
Civilization by the the end of the
century so not a chance directly we are
there'll be no civilization left by 2100
it's only a question of when it
collapses now do you need to know why
that well I keep thinking I wonder who
are these going to be who are going to
survive who are going to be are going to
be the wealthy healthy I actually back
the Africans I back anybody I was
wondering that any anybody still living
pretty close to um close to the Earth
yeah and if you're gather all better ex
circumstances well if you look if you
look at how The Economist assess it they
say the damage is going to mainly occur
in the third world because they don't
they're not as advanced as we are and
they don't have the that's why they're
going to survive that's what I was
thinking as because if you can hunt if
you if you're actually in an
agricultural region predominantly um
you've got some of the skills that are
necessary if if we have a collapse in
Energy Systems here and can't bring food
in in two weeks there'll be food rods or
less
yeah the idea of human
civilization associated with the idea of
consuming more and more energy yes
exactly producing more and more surface
is very we have thousands of years of
human
civilization from
water until electricity was discovered
so we did fine we survived we had all
kinds of
going on nourishing themselves
constantly now I like the idea of there
being more energy and cation coming
civilization coming to an end I think
that's probably what we need to do and
we need to face a world in which we will
not have energy and hopefully the whole
idea of growth which is causing this
destructure will be replaced by
something that economists usually dis
which is the Ste State economy
I I have problems with that for simple
simple reason one is we're not going to
get do anything peaceful like that at
all my my picture is not a peaceful
situation like that what I expect is Mad
Max huh it won't be peaceful it be
brutal it wasn't well in the past it
wasn't true agree we had if you look
again at things like the slave period
you when you have the idea that I made
about Labor without energy being a corse
what were you doing you were getting
slaves for their energy they were
intelligent beings who could' feed to
have energy and you tell them what to do
we did it to animals same sort of story
then we find coal and suddenly with the
with the particularly the with the the
watt steam engine we can get enormous
what we are not aware is stored solar
energy to do that work for us so we're
living with energy slaves now okay and
that's an incredible increase in the
standard of living we all
have 200 years ago you wouldn't have we
had candles here if you were lucky okay
um so we're benefiting this enormous
energy increase and because of we just
used to it we're not even aware of it
most of the time we're energy blind in
that
sense I just going to say maybe be
interesting to hear your thoughts on I'm
just sorry yeah um it' be interesting to
hear your thoughts on the role of techno
utopianism in sort of keeping everyone
calm because I think there's still still
quite a big subconscious belief that
like we're going to Tech our way out of
this like it's fine yeah we're the
people that do believe and see that
we're on the way into civilizational
breakdown I think there's a large
portion of people that still think that
we're going to be able to do
geoengineering and absorb carbon and oh
we'll just plant some enough trees and
you know just all this kind of tech will
save us um attitude which is obviously
kind of well it's
because yes it does we have 30 or 40
years to develop it because it's not
necessarily 30 or 40 years but to go
from a concept to an actual production
is hugely complicated you can have a
prototype but to turn that prototype and
something you can turn out of a factory
where each machine looks like and
behaves like the one before it on the
production line you're talking if you're
lucky 5 years to get to that point um
and then you've got got to have the
technology in the very first place
coming up with the idea itself and then
you know producing them on scale all
these things take time and the the
Techno optimists are assuming we've got
plenty of time which would only be true
if we followed the advice of the limits
to growth 50 years ago and started
reorient our civilizations from 50 years
ago if instead we're already at
1.5 over pre-industrial this year will
probably just miss being
1.5 warmer than pre-industrial by a
heads bread it'll be 1.45 1.48 something
like that and that was not expected to
happen until 2030 or later okay and then
we're looking at I mean follow all the
work being done by climate scien
assessing the current climate it looks
like we're spiking by 1 and a half of a
degree next year so we could actually
temporarily under the impact ofo hit 2
de woman and so we're going to get the
impact of that on the climate and give
you an example this is not something
that's in the literature you know a guy
called Paul Beck okay I saw Paul make
this argument to me it's quite
reasonable when we lose the Artic summer
seos and it's not a question of if it's
when then and all even just of it
declines substantially at some point in
time that will no longer be the coldest
point in the north of the planet the
coldest point will be Greenland okay so
what is possible to happen is that the
atmospheric circulation that currently
is centered on the North Pole and the
Artic summer sea ice will move a couple
of one half th000 km to Greenland so the
center of
rotation of
the winds in the northern hemisphere
could move yeah th000 km 1 and a half
thousand and then that will affect the
weather patterns that are over all the
agricultural regions of the Northern
Hemisphere okay Iowa the corn Ukraine
and Russia for corn and wheat suddenly
might not get the climate they expect
for that growing season now if that
happens then next year could be really
exciting in terms of food
supplies and I think our politicians are
about as prepared for that as they were
for
Co so that's that's the sort of stuff
that climat on ssts are speculating
about and it is speculation there's no I
haven't seen any research papers on that
particular topic yet but the fear is
that level of change will occur and so
rapidly the Techno Optimist won't have a
chance to to build the you need
stability you need you need time to get
these things done yeah well and the
other thing is that you do you could
even just take the assumption that we do
have all the tech and resources and
skills we need right now let's just
assume that we did have it
to reverse everything the political
isn't there it's just not there so if
you look back I mean my analogy what
we're facing is World War II simply in
in the case that we had a a population
that didn't want to have a war for
obvious reasons didn't believe a war was
going to happen and were content to
believe that they could negotiate they
were out of it I know Chamberlain gets a
bad rap here I've seen some historical
papers saying when he went to do the the
the peace in our time what he was
actually buying was time for to English
to England to rearm okay so there's he
not totally deserving of the appr
probium he gets in the historical record
maybe not but Churchill was one saying
you can't trust Hitler there going to be
a war etc etc he wasn't listening to
until after Poland had fallen uh Austria
had suceeded France was invaded and
there were a quar of a million British
troops on dun cook about to get wiped
out then people said we've got to do
something serious and the Americans
similarly for Pearl Harbor they didn't
react until that stage in the scale they
needed so but what they did was they
converted almost all the shipyards from
producing commercial ships to what they
call Liberty ships and in about one and
a half year period they went from
virtually no ships being produced to
2,000 ships per year so they did make
that change very very rapidly but they
had to take the threat seriously and
they didn't take it seriously until
Pearl Harbor so I a similar feeling here
we're not going to take the threat
seriously until something on the scale
that will make Pearl Harbor look like a
picnic happens and people realize this
is not something that generally affects
brown people in Pakistan which is the
biggest ofice we've seen so far that was
oneir of the country was underwater
earlier this year later later last year
um until it happens to white people on a
substantial scale in areas they don't
expect it to happen we want won't do
anything what about the uh uh insurance
companies fairly realistic about climate
change trouble is the insurance
companies are beginning to worry so that
you can no longer get a houseold
Insurance in most of Florida now the oil
companies as well oil companies they're
still on it for a buck but that's very
realistic about it well I don't I would
talk about the World Companies
separately to the insurance companies
but the insurance companies should be
the ones who are worried about this
seriously and again they delegated to
the economists they trusted the
economists and the
economists you can't get insurance for
your house because you're now judged to
be in a flood lead and therefore you
don't Merit any inance that's right and
that's going to happen to coastal areas
are going to hit that as we start seeing
more and by Rivers sorry and by coal and
by Rivers but that's again that's that's
restricted increasingly engineering has
to take change seriously ordinary
engineering has to whether it's
construction whether whether it's um if
you're building a pipeline like an oil G
yeah you have to take the L of the perr
seriously when you're constructing your
your your your pipeline and they they do
they take it for granted the is going to
go so I mean it's a an a place example
so they take Engineers I'm I'm not
saying this is not pangloss I'm simply
saying that in C are of operation people
are taking it as a given yeah but
they're taking it as a given and they
still think they can continue Business
as Usual by changing the way you support
the pipes they still pumping carbon they
still getting stuff that's you know
Laden with carbon that you're going to
burn to make a profit out of so like if
we look at the oil companies we know
that
BP and um I think shell had internal
evidence saying they expected carbon
dioxide levels to reach what they are
now they expected temperature increase
they expected climatic disaster and they
made a boardroom decision to suppress
that
material and so the board decided to say
we can cope with anything it's not a
problem it's not serious and they end up
funding people like William nouse but
nous economists don't pay do this
because they're paid to by the way they
believe it and then that's why they get
the funding because they're saying what
powers that they want them to say
they're not they're not being bought
they're being rewarded for saying what
the you know so-called Skeptics in oil
companies would like to say what that
means is we're totally
unprepared what we face so
Steve you've described the problem very
well um and the misdiagnosis of the
problem what what
tools are available to sort of lessen
the the
pain it's a bit like saying we've we've
provoked King Kong and there's not one
of them there's a 200 of them uh and
they're made of carbon alloy what can we
do to stop them they said
nothing okay it's again humans like to
say there's a problem here's a solution
some of my colleagues are saying it's
not a problem it's a predicament okay
you're in something which you should not
have got yourself into you're not
prepared for it and you may not get out
of it
so that's unfortunately my perspective
the one thing with I think
geoengineering is inevitable okay we're
doing it now we're doing it by accident
we're doing bad geoengineering okay like
geoengineering like a somebody
in their own bedroom okay that creates
Ste you you get structures out of you
don't want them there but they're there
you've made the room different so we've
done that to the climate so I think what
we we're going to see geoengineering to
try to reverse this but of course you
can't reverse back to the situation
you're in beforehand you're going to
reverse the temperature rise perhaps but
you won't change the fact that you're
damaging the stability of the Hallam
climate so two of the engineering
proposals that I think are feasible and
likely to happen on scale first of all
the sulfur dioxide seeding of the
stratosphere but a group of scientists
have now said we can actually see the
regions around the North and South Pole
so that they reform the ice that exists
there and then therefore that we get as
well as reflecting some of the sunlight
using the um sulfur particles you also
refreeze some of the ice so you reverse
the temperature rise by increas
increasing the LL beta and another group
doing it rather less violently is a
group called miria which stands for
mirrors for Earth's energy rebalancing
and they're trying to produce mirrors
which reflect most of the sunlight back
into outer space again before it gets a
chance to be absorbed and turn it
infrared so then just go come down and
bounce back out again and they're doing
it a local scale so you can actually
they're putting this in slums and naobi
and so on yeah do you think we are
equipped with the right kind of
governance absolutely not
because because around Co one of the big
issues I saw was like we don't have
adequate Global governance like who's
when is the moment when these scientists
who know what's going on have their
ideas of what the solutions are like
there's a kind of when do they get
released or you know it's like
got the red button to be like okay let's
start taking this seriously I I think
we've just got the wrong political
system in per and we call it democracy
but if you look back and see what the
auth and we think it's we base it on the
Greeks okay you go back and see what the
Greeks had they had
sortition they didn't have votes they
didn't uh you know candidates and
political parties what they had was that
asked the seven major families to
nominate two people each and then the
two people each they nominate they then
got the another two people they went
through eight rounds of this before they
selected who was in the assembly it was
basically a huge random number generator
with a bit of intelligence you chose you
didn't choose the local lunatic or the
local alcoholic okay but you had a
process that
chose distributed the choice Factor
through the population so that who you
chose was representative of the Greek
population and intelligent enough to
discuss the issu they had to discuss now
what do we do we get people of we get a
system that says vote for me I'm a
narcissistic idiot and we get Boris
bloody Johnson and all the twerps you've
had in England and you know you got some
of the worst on the planet but not not
spectacularly so you got Donald Trump
you probably was so you got people like
that you have people who scientists have
to explain complicated issues to and
forget it they just don't have the
capacity to absorb it so we've got the
wrong people making the decisions and
the question is when did the right
people get to make the decisions
probably after it's obvious we're in a
catastrophe and even then um you know
it's they likely to still continue
hanging on to the advice of climate
change denialists or ideologues about
capitalism or about socialism okay um
rather than people who can actually say
this is the engineering we need let's
get it out there in scale quickly so I
think we've got completely the wrong
governance system and that's not just at
the global level it's actually all the
nations as
well
so I don't think has got any hope of
making sensible decisions about
it no but I agree with I I will return
to question to Thor who was saying that
what we uh mean by Civilization now is
this constant increase of production
that is actually not necessarily a
wonderful thing to do answer my question
steady state sorry steady state
economics if we made we could if we made
a gradual move from
1975 towards what sha had in mind and
what Herman daily had in mind um then we
could have achieved a steady state
economics but what we're going to do is
a precipice economics okay going to go
from incredible level of energy we
currently consume we're probably going
to boost that when the crisis starts
hitting if you have for example a wet
bul catastrophe in an Indian city you
likely then to get more power stations
being built and more air conditioners
put out to try to prevent it happening
again and then a plunge when it all
breaks down so we'll get to a steady
state but it's going to be a steady
state that
involves 7 billion people dying and
political and social chaos we go again
you dismissed
huh I didn't hear
youed I'm saying we not we're going to
get steady state after a couple hundred
years of
chaos okay and in that steady state
we're likely to lose all the knowledge
we've accumulated it's growth that's
producing time of course it is that's
what we have to stop and we're going to
stop it the hard way not the easy way
that's the problem we could have stopped
at the easy way we follow the to growth
in
1972 think it's too late huh it's too
late which country do you think which
name which ST which current state do you
think has got the is best equipped to
deal with the chaos I would say s that
we
ourselves I'd go for Asia in general but
not not I don't think India or Pakistan
or
Bangladesh near the that near the
equator near the equator actually have
less increase in temperature than
further away there's less bity to deal
with there's the societies are more
cohesive so people mention China but
China's made problem first of all the
see scale of the country 1.4 billion
people and secondly apparently it still
has to import a large amount of its food
and then also a lot of its energy is
doing rapid really rapid transition to
uh both nuclear which they now a whole
lot of new nuclear stations and solar
and wind mainly solar um but they still
massively relied upon coal but they
would be able to handle the rationing
system to say we're not going to let
people starve to death so they if you
China decided to ration food then the
people would accept that rationing
whereas in the west if they going to
ration food there'll be chaos so I I
back Asian countries I I back for for
example like Thailand which I have have
a yeah I have I have a house there um so
in Thailand is feasible could I ask just
the gentleman behind had his hand up so
maybe everyone put their hand up when
they want to speak so I think it was
youim
yeah um I wanted try and shift the focus
from from one sort of disruption to
another scho yeah um since you were one
of the few people that had some
foresight of the global financial crisis
and I'm wondering how you're thinking
about the risk of another financial
crisis occurring as a result of the
transition oh it'll happen for sure yeah
and just to you know to put that in
context the growth of renewable energy
for the last seven years has been 17%
the growth of renewable energy been 17%
per year for the last seven years fossil
fuels growing about 1% per year so it
only has to keep doing the same and it
destroys a of fossil fuel asset value
within the next decade or so is is
becoming quite forceable and um you know
some people are looking at that and
saying well the amount of asset value
destruction that's going to take place
makes what happened in 20089 look quite
small oh yeah is that how you're see
yeah I mean then if you see people like
Stuart Kirk who spoke at the financial
times conference last last year do you
anybody see that speech he was head of
what called what ESC environmental and
social goals or was that ESC stands for
governance H govern governance okay he
was head of ESG at one of the major
companies I forgotten which one is he
the HSBC HSBC that's it and he gave a
speak at the financial times saying you
don't need to worry about why investors
don't need to worry about climate change
and he's using all the economist
arguments by saying that if you look at
the ipcc so they best estimates he said
2.6% fall in GDP from 4 degrees of
global warming now in fact he was wrong
it was the estimates the time he spoke
were 10 to 23% of GDP but that's still
GDP which is five times higher than
today so they're saying rather than
being five times as Rich per head will
be between four and four and a half
times as Rich per head okay but he said
he said wouldd be 500 five times richer
and 10 times richer and he said if you
knock 5% off that who cares you won't
even notice and if the economist were
correct he'd be
right now that's the mindset people in
the finance sector who think they're
Masters of the Universe they've
swallowed the garbage coming out from
economists so the the valuations they've
got on the market are completely off the
scale compared to what will happen when
we start seeing climate crisis that are
so scary people start to say should we
shut down oil can we know rid
ridiculously to we rational reduce the
consumption radically that sort of
situation then the pricings for those
companies and all the companies that
hang off them will collapse so yeah
financial crisis that makes not 2007
look like a
picnic has anyone who's not asked a
question got a question they'd like to
ask yeah so um how do we hold the
government to account is it time for
civil res
Civil Disobedience and direct action to
change his genocidal policies it is want
that do you want that on line yes you do
want that on line yeah yeah it is and
and you'll see what happened to that
poor guy walking slowly down the street
and not spending 6 months in jail
walking slowly down the road so again
none of this will be taken seriously
until you know we've got another dun
cook and this is the trouble the the M
the mass of the population and certainly
the mass of the politicians won't change
orientation until they realize holy
effectively the Nazis are on the
shores then they'll get a change so the
trouble is it's definitely the time for
direct action but the trouble is at the
moment will'll be rubbish for damaging
transport you know you see the way the
the Exile protesters were to to right of
causing traffic jams in the heart of
London well that's nothing to what
climate change is going to do at some
point so I think it's almost preparing
we we just don't have a political system
that responds correctly to the scale of
threats we take we take and that's not
just the politicians themselves it's how
the public reacts to people who are
aware of what's Happening likely to
occur and sticking their necks out and
saying it you're seen as idiots and
fools so it's you know
I hate the fact that I'm talking about
this okay I wish that it wasn't
necessary to raise these issues I wish
Economist done a good job and warn
people about it because economists
actually played the major role in
undermining the limits to growth they
completely disparaged the research
rubbished it without understanding the
what's called System Dynamics technology
behind it and that's why limits to
growth was just this phenomenon the
1970s and then it's been for most people
forgotten and they're regarded as a
bunch of hippies they're a bunch of MIT
Engineers who put that report together
so but their their approach was
antithetical to what economists wanted
so they rubbished the hell out of them
and that technology has never really
been developed properly as a way of
analyzing Dynamic
systems and we are now on the precipice
of a climate breakdown so I'm sorry it's
being such a dis organized talk but I my
my feeling is we we just aren't prepared
for the scale of how the climate is
going to react to the energy levels
we've now allowed it to retain from the
Sun that's what's really happening
people often think which is more to
affect the the climate we are the amount
of energy we put into the uh
biosphere uh is
about 1500th or thousandth of the energy
we retain from the Sun putting carbon
dioxide up there so it's the blanking
effect of carbon dioxide not the energy
we're putting in but even on that front
if we continued down the path we're in
like another three or four Centuries by
the laws of
thermodynamics
alone without global warming the
temperature of the planet would hit 100
C in about four
centuries so we simply in terms of the
comment about um uh sustainable and zero
zero growth we have to get to that point
because continuing growth on a finite
Planet even without global warming will
mean life is impossible here in about
400 years and that's you know we talk
about our politics we go back to 10 you
talk about
1066 you that's that's a thousand years
ago we have less than half that where
even without global warming our energy
consumption on the planet would make the
planet unlivable so we need that realism
and we don't have it right now and I
think we're in
for a planetary wake up
call any other questions from people who
haven't asked questions yet maybe uh
it's not a question it's just a comment
you said that um the Chinese would
accept um rationing yeah I mean it's not
that long ago that we had rationing here
yeah so why wouldn't be accepted here I
think well it'll be really the
politicians organizing it I mean the
Chinese could put that together in a
matter of weeks okay uh and people would
accept it as necessary for survival and
they'd have a system
out you know i' got reckon a month for
the Chinese have a workable system the
British you won't you you won't make the
decision until you suddenly realize you
haven't got enough food to ration to
begin with
so like I you I've been I back in a
society that have more of a collective
mentality and that's certainly isn't
just because China was Communist it's
because there's been a whole history in
Asia of state scale irrigation to enable
the farming to occur in the first place
whereas we have all you know the rain
comes out of the sky here you don't need
to organize it so you got a Libertarian
attitude to farming whereas the Chinese
know it's the the scale of
transformation they did of the landscape
and that was done collectively so
they're happy to continue behaving in a
collective fashion irregardless of
having a period of being under communist
rule so I think they've got more chance
to survive than we have the The Hope in
what you said I see two stories that a
little bit hopeful one is uh when
actually uh English people saw the Nazis
coming to the shore they change very
quickly and so we still can do that
not too late for example in our rway
we're trying to prevent the change of
the hi and I don't know maybe somebody
wants to say how it goes from from from
our
[Music]
community we need to e and the amount
of
was
here
totally
technology that has all completely
changed and that's a micro how
everything
else yeah I mean Simon has written
What's the title of your book
Simon
five times faster about the capacity
to rapidly change our Energy Systems
rapidly change how we get around in
transport work change how we work and
try to do you know a Tipping Point in
the social system in that direction and
we need that attitude now we need to
devote the resources to it that are
necessary to have some chance of having
a system which can survive what the
climate is likely to do but the trouble
is most of what we done is simply added
those new energy sources on top of coal
and oil so we need something like an
agreement that every every extra you
know watt of energy coming out of solar
panels means two Watts less being taken
from oil and oil and coal and accept a
reduction in our energy consumption now
okay that's the sort of agreement we
needed but we're not going to get it out
of cop yeah okay you're not going to get
it out of can either no
do well it you might work for C Council
but on the ground for them I with them
okay fine act like this yeah well you
know we're fighting at the moment to
have a green whatever you like to call
it heating system instead of being
forced to have gas central heating put
in after Tom was saying 50 years ago you
know we had a futuristic system more or
less you know with hot water water cools
in the wall and now we're being told we
have to have gas fir central heating
radiators in in this complex right here
as we're sitting here that's ridiculous
so you know in in
practice it's really frustrating you
know you can talk you can talk about the
global situation but on the ground it's
just nobody cares yeah and that's why we
come back to our the way we make
decisions you know we've we' we have our
political system of democracy rose out
of this French Revolution with the left
and the right hand chambers of the party
and it was certainly an improvement over
feudalism but it wasn't an intelligent
way of getting intelligent people to
make the decisions now we have a party
system where the most egotistical twe
gets to the top and they then make the
decision then you have people who got no
training in science they all go you know
they do politics philosophy and
economics at the University swallow that
ideology and then think they can run the
world but the two BLS are the side of
Johnson sorry the two BLS at the side of
Johnson um witty and um what's his name
um Valance were highly uh scientific um
people they were civil service Civil
Service yeah the job they were highly
trained very educated scientists um they
were there on this in in in Downing
Street at the time of of Co yeah but
they're surrounded by a bunch of Fools
and you also have in in a science sense
you need to be able to integrate all
these different ways of analyzing
together so the whole idea of limits to
growth was to get a a system perspective
if you change this element of the system
how does the rest respond and that's
what System Dynamics were supposed to do
so you can combine find the expertise of
numerous Specialists to see what the
impact of changing one part of a system
is on the remainder we haven't done it
why can science transform technology in
ways that Tom to and we're all aware of
and your book is presuming about five
times faster so science is if you like
heed when it comes to economic
transformation know what massive
evidence about and yet you're saying
that science w't can't be heed so
there's some sort of obstacle in some
spheres it's it's it's absolutely taken
for granted and listen to and is
transformative because and yet in other
spheres it's it's resolu existance so
what's going on there because science
and technology is is not neutral it's
always political it's uh it's not about
you know but it's also that scientists
and pol scientists don't become
politicians we don't put scientists at
the top of our uh Department government
departments we put economists there and
that's why neoclassical economics is
incredibly deadly uh because it has a
totally naive view of how capitalism
actually functions and it will fall
apart so we've got the gentleman behind
second Ro Oliver yeah so yeah so I
totally by the argument that if we carry
on this growth path then it's it's going
to head to we're going to we're going to
reach we're going to head to a collapse
like the people said in 1970s that's
but also isn't there a chance that we
get a sipping point in the social system
so I'm thinking of um when the Burling
war came down 1989 right very few people
saw that coming they saw they thought
the communism was going to last for
decades more so I mean is it should we
be thinking now people involved
environmental movement thinking like as
if we were in the communist state in the
1980s Working for this change but not
knowing you know hoping it's going to
happen not knowing if it will happen but
but believing that it might be possible
to get a really rapid shift in the
social economic
system I think they are aren't they
there are again it's a question of how
fast it's happening and um
like there were also questions of you
know do we have the minerals for the
type of nonfossil fuel economy we' need
because people talk about renewable what
they mean is Sun's always those there
but the minerals you need for the
machines that absorb the photons that
converted to electricity they're not
they're not renewable okay so we we have
we really need to have we need an
engineer driven Society not the
economist dominated one we have right
now I mean the engineers have realized
the scale of change that is
necessary uh and how rapidly it has to
occur and if we did that fast enough
yeah there might be some possibility but
the only that really is our only
solution in one sense that combined with
deciding we have to no longer let the
inequality that's developed over the
last 40 years continue we have to say
okay for going to surviv as a society we
have to consume as one and that means
rationing of energy
consumption and you don't let the
outrageous wealth of the top 2% dominate
the energy load we put on the
planet and Phi yeah struggling to
questions just like so many thoughts
because you know some of the things I'm
thinking about is
um helping people Envision a degrowth
path I think for most people like di
degrowth is just so like impossible like
we can't we can't do that um there's a
question of if you're a change maker and
an activist right now what's the best
way to spend your energy and I thought
really carefully about this I was part
of XR and was very much in um act
climate activism five five years ago
I've transitioned into focusing on kind
of imagination which is kind bizarre but
helping people imagine what the future
could look like and that sort of thing
and I think there are a lot of different
intervention points like media you know
I just think maybe it' be helpful to
hear or interesting to hear your views
in terms of what are what are ways that
you see as being useful right now given
that we are heading to to catastrophe
and the system's not moving there are
these blocks um it might be that we're
the the day before the burlin war never
know you know it's likein equivalent so
how can all of us be taking our place
and helping push
that war yeah uh this is a problem we've
never experienced before like I can make
advice about out aoid a financial crisis
based on the you know 150 we've had so
far around the world and the three major
ones and so on this is really you know
completely beyond our
scale War it's a bit like a World War
like I thought yeah well a large part of
the world war was becoming
self-sufficient producing your own food
uh so that's I think we this is an
anti-globalization period we' we've
relied upon increasing our production by
Outsourcing it to the third world and
paying people low wages there to do the
work in the factories and none of us
most of us haven't had a factory job in
our lives
um so we have to say we've got to look
at how to be produce food locally um
what scale of technology is feasible
with smaller communities than we've been
used to like computer technology
involves a machine the central machine
in a um chip fabrication Factory costs
$450 million there's one company in the
world that makes it it happens to be in
the Netherlands um so the idea well what
could we prod if we want to produce
computers what scale is feasible what
technology could we used at that scale
uh so it's it's really
descaling is is degrowth means reducing
the scale of human activity and
localizing it just a quick follow a
question do you think local food
production is possible in the UK like if
we actually took that seriously I know
TR yeah not not in London you know you
just don't have the
food country UK Countryside is a fairly
inefficient way of producing food um you
could probably you've got enough land to
produce for the the entire country but
again to make the shift in time um if
you move away from Super phosphate base
production yeah I've seen arguments that
if we didn't have super phosphate the
sustainable population of the planet
would be 2 billion people with three
four times that so um yeah it is
you know there it is not it's again it's
predicament like you ask me what's the
problem what's the solution the solution
is not to get into the
predicament so does anyone online have
some questions they'd like to put to
Steve just type it in the chat if you do
maybe you type in the chat and meanwhile
uh while we wait to answer because we
have to finish we're already like 20
minutes over our okay one hour but so
what I want to say like second hope
fulfill you was saying first is like you
know we as a big Society wake up and
started to do things that solve
everything like was in World War II and
the second is uh actually if 1 billion
people still survive or even 500 million
living in this like small bands that's
not so bad too at least you know
something something would be there and
then coming back to the local
communities so that's our brain trust
and rway yeah so we were like looking
into what actually can we do here and
right now so I do believe that we can
produce food we cannot produce you know
cows enough to for everyone but we can
produce spirulina we can produce
fermented food we can comfortably and
healthy survive just in a different way
the same things with the production of
things we don't need factories we do
have 3D
printer yeah okay all right I got a
couple of questions here um I start with
what kind of relationships need to be
focused on to be reproduced to influence
the kind of world that is possible
rather than focusing on where to
hide oh actually no that was the second
part of the question I read from the
start made too another world is not
impossible it's happening what role do
alternative economists have in realiz
what kind of world emerges for example
what will your
students teach their students in short
is there any role for future alternative
economists in this predicament and then
what kind of relationships need to be I
mean we need to understand how a
capitalist economy functions and we have
a mythological view of that at the
moment which is L it to fundamentally
destroying that factory function so I
prefer we we have to understand the role
of energy
if we had a theory of Economics that
understood the role of energy we'd also
understand thermodynamic waste the
inevitability of waste dumping it back
into the environment so we need a
biophysical economics and I'm one of
number of people working on how that can
be developed and we've got nowhere near
as far as we should to be able to
replace the mainstream but substantial
so there is a with a biophysically aware
economics we would never have allowed
the level of over production to occur
that we've done so that's absolutely
vital
and you know that's what I'm working on
at the moment okay and my feeling is we
should have done this 50 60 years
ago we should have started back then
then we might have been able to set
policy up to avoid a catastrophe I think
we're in for a catastrophe the problem
for me then is how do we hang on to as
much human knowledge as possible because
I've given up any potential of hanging
on to human lives but the thing which
would be really tragic would be to lose
what we've learned in the last quarter
Millennium we know so much more about
the universe now the menu 250 years ago
it's all been enabled by fossil fuels
but we've overdone the fossil fuels to
the stage where the breakdown that's
going to occur is likely to make people
anti- knowledge and anti- technology and
that would be a huge tragedy because
there's one thing that we should be is
it's people who observe the universe a
species that understands the universe
and we're the first generation that can
talk about having an understanding of
the Universe on a grand scale and that's
all come out of the energy we've
consumed without the energy without the
technology to understand the energy
without the mathematics and physics and
Engineering around it we wouldn't have
this knowledge so it' be a tragedy to
accumulate it and then destroy it using
the same
mechanism so my you know how do we how
do we blame the right people for the
catastrophe and the right people are not
the engineers and not the scientists
it's the economists in particular and
the politicians who followed their
advice so I wanted my main thing is
saying we have to blame the right group
and the right grip that caused this
crisis is the
economists not the
engineers yeah I think you almost ask
that question now but there's uh two uh
from Martin White one uh came up quite
early in your talk I think way was still
with the analysis so he asked this
what's the distinction between factor
and input not clear to me unfortunately
not deeply familiar with the terms and
how they are
used he asked
um but also what do you say to the
highly regarded Le journalists for
example on the Ft that still
I missed that part of the questions my
hearing is bad what what do you say to
the highly regarded lead journalists for
example in the financial times that seem
to think that we still need more
growth and that's one reason I'm in
favor of universal basic income rather
than a job guarantee we don't need
people working we need them to consuming
as little as possible so uh I think the
financial times is off with the fairies
as usual and that Stuart Kirk now works
for the finan cial time so I'm even more
sure they're off with the fairies by
factor of production what not NE the
inputs means things like you know coal
iron oil uh plants going into a energy
process and being transformed into
something chemically and and
structurally different on the other side
so inputs is what we actually use
neoclassicals reduce it all what they
call factors of production and those
have Labor and capital
they don't have any um you know they s
like different skilled labors different
types of machines it's just all lumped
together as an Aggregate and that's a
large part where the um delusion of
economists come from because they write
terms on a Blackboard you output equals
a function of Labor and capital and they
presume that's the real world so the
danger is they don't get trained and all
the engineering they don't see what it's
actually involved in taking energy
taking of scientific concept causing it
to use the required inputs to produce
that in the right ratio they've got none
of that engineering background what
knowledge whatsoever that's why they've
been so dangerous directly to that point
so okay factor is a neoc classic
construct yeah without needing to
understand what is really going on
yeah so I think we're we're out of time
okay so I just wanted to say thank you
to you Steve it's been
incredible thank you to the RO way
tenants for providing the space because
that's incredible too thank you for the
people who have come in person and the
people who come
online and I think there's more to do
here clearly definitely and um this is a
series of lectures so this is the second
there will be more I hope everyone can
come to the many ones February the next
one we don't know yet but we will
put the Arts and now we want to thank
you s uh for amazing food and whoever
come like yeah and whoever is
[Applause]
here something very different and
unique combining know climate change
make